# FDA Data Analysis
This data set contains drug information from the FDA Orange Book, with data files updated as of July 10, 2017. This data set can be used to view drugs by pharma, along with drug status, exclusivity, and patent information.

The data sets present information on the type of new drug application approval. New Drug Applications (NDA or innovator) are ”N”. Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDA or generic) are “A”. The data set is highly unbalanced, the positive class (generic) account for 3.05%.

It contains raw data which is a mix of numerical input variables and text values. There are 14  original features '. Feature ‘ingredient’ contains the active ingredient(s) for the product. Multiple ingredients are in alphabetical order, separated by a semicolon. Feature ‘df_route’ are the product dosage form and route separated by a semi-colon. Feature ‘trade_name’ is the trade name of the product as shown on the labeling. Feature ‘applicant’ is the firm name holding legal responsibility for the new drug application. The firm name is condensed to a maximum twenty character unique string. Feature ‘strength’ is the potency of the active ingredient. This may repeat for multiple part products. Feature ‘appl_type’ is the type of new drug application approval. New Drug Applications (NDA or innovator) are ”N”. Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDA or generic) are “A”. Feature ‘appl_no’ is the FDA assigned number to the application. Feature ‘product_no’ is the FDA assigned number to identify the application products. Each strength is a separate product. Feature ‘te_code’ indicates the therapeutic equivalence rating of generic to innovator Rx products. Feature ‘approval_date’ is the date the product was approved as stated in the FDA approval letter to the applicant. The format is Mmm dd, yyyy. Products approved prior to the January 1, 1982 contain the phrase: "Approved prior to Jan 1, 1982". Feature ‘rld’ is a drug product approved under section 505(c) of the FD&C Act for which FDA has made a finding of safety and effectiveness. In the electronic Orange Book, an RLD is identified by “RLD” in the RLD column. Feature ‘rs’ or “reference standard” is the drug product selected by FDA that an applicant seeking approval of an ANDA must use in conducting an in vivo bioequivalence study required for approval of an ANDA. Feature ‘type’ is the group or category of approved drugs. Format is RX, OTC, DISCN. Feature ‘applicant_full_name’ is the full name of the firm holding legal responsibility for the new drug application.

There is also information on the exclusivity granted each of the applicants. The features in the exclusivity data set includes ‘exclusivity_code’ which is the code to designate exclusivity granted by the FDA to a drug product and ‘exclusivity_date’ which is the date the exclusivity expires. The patent data set contains the following features: ‘appl_type’ which is the type of new drug application approval, ‘appl_no’ which is the FDA assigned number to the application,  ‘product_no’ which is the FDA assigned number to identify the application products, ‘patent_no’ which are the patent numbers as submitted by the applicant holder for patents covered by the statutory provisions, ‘patent_expire_date_text’ which are the dates the patent expires as submitted by the applicant holder including applicable extensions, ‘drug_substance_flag’ which an indicator of the sponsor submitted the patent as claiming the drug substance, ‘drug_product_flag’: Patents submitted on FDA Form 3542 and listed after August 18, 2003 may have a drug product flag indicating the sponsor submitted the patent as claiming the drug product, ‘patent_use_code’ are codes to designate a use patent that covers the approved indication or use of a drug product and ‘delist_flag’ which shows the sponsors who have requested patent be delisted.

Data set contained in ‘reference.xlsx’ give the definition / meaning of any given code in the data set. The feature ‘rld’ which contains the status of approval of a drug product: RLD is a drug product approved under section 505(c) of the FD&C Act for which FDA has made a finding of safety and effectiveness. This can be used for dependant-drug-status learning, while the feature ‘exclusivity period’ could be used for dependant-exclusivity learning. 

Feature 'appl-type,' is the response variable and it takes value “N” in case it is a New Drug Applications (NDA or innovator) or “A” if it is generic. 

### Data Wrangling

### Principal Components

The source of the data is the Orange Book Data Files of the US Food and Drug Administration  https://data.world/basilhayek/fda-orange-book-drug-data-july-2017